---
id: 1928
title: 'Obama&#8217;s Battle for the Youth Vote'
date: 2012-04-25T20:16:45+00:00
author: Tyler Miksanek
layout: post
guid: http://rantaweek.com/?p=1928
permalink: /?p=1928
categories:
  - Domestic
  - Election 2012
tags:
  - election 2012
  - Obama
  - Romney
---
In 2008, Obama successfully won the support of the nation&#8217;s youth, including many first time voters, and used these votes to help him win the presidency.  The question for 2012 is whether or not he will have a similar success with young voters this time around.

If Mitt Romney&#8217;s polling data proves accurate, Obama shouldn&#8217;t worry about losing the 18-29 age group to the Republicans.  Exit polls from throughout the primary season have shown that Romney&#8217;s support increases with age, a stark contrast from Obama&#8217;s youth-heavy support.  Even considering their usual lukewarm attitudes towards Republican candidates, 18-29 year olds have been especially cold towards Mr. Romney.

As recently as the Wisconsin primary, when he was already considered the inevitable nominee, Romney was only able to garner 33% of the 18-29 demographic.  Considering that he won the state with 44% of the vote, Romney seems to be 25% less popular with youth than he is with voters overall.  While these numbers are specifically from Wisconsin, the general trend throughout the entire primary season was that Romney&#8217;s youth support was significantly lower than his overall support.

One eighteen year old and soon-to-be first time voter sums youth sentiments up quite well, &#8220;I think that most of [Obama&#8217;s] youth voting bloc will stay with him mostly because the Republicans haven&#8217;t been able to draw much of the attention towards their side&#8221;.

Clearly, Obama does not need to worry about his rival stealing much of the youth vote.  Romney&#8217;s campaign has already demonstrated its failure at appealing to young voters.  Instead, what Obama needs to worry about is youth apathy.

After all, many young voters were allured in 2008 by Obama&#8217;s promises of change.  However, things are very different this time around.  The outsider in 2008, Obama must play an insider&#8217;s game in 2012.  Obama can no longer run on a platform of change and must now campaign based off his presidential record.

The status quo that Obama now offers is much less alluring than his fervent calls for change four years ago.  However, his healthcare bill, which extended the age that youths can stay on their parents&#8217; insurance, may be a crucial achievement that brings 18-29 year olds back to the polls for him.  Then again, if the Supreme Court invalidates the law, youths may feel like they are back to square one and stay away.

Ultimately, Obama may face some difficulties bringing youths to the polls, but lack of competition from Mitt Romney in this demographic gives him the opportunity to focus on his successes and hope for the best.