---
id: 1153
title: Rising From Michigan and Arizona
date: 2012-02-29T19:51:50+00:00
author: mjdudak
layout: post
guid: http://rantaweek.com/?p=1153
permalink: /?p=1153
categories:
  - Domestic
  - Election 2012
tags:
  - Romney
  - Santorum
---
Hopefully you enjoyed our primary live blogging last night, now as promised, a full in depth analysis.

On Febuary 28th, 2012, Michigan and Arizona held their Republican primaries, the last primaries before Super Tuesday. Going into them, Romney had Arizona in the bag, while Michigan was hotly contested. Polls showed Romney and Santorum continually flip flopping as front runners in Michigan. As the results started to come in, Santorum took an early, but small lead. As the night wore on and more results were released, Romney started pulling more and more ahead. In the end, Romney beat out Santorum 41%-37%. However with Michigan being split up proportionally, and Arizona being winner take all, Romney won about 34 or so delegates on the night, while Santorum won 14-15. However, since this is a trivial amount of delegates, the importance is not in how many votes each candidate received, but rather about what these results indicate for their campaigns going forward. As Super Tuesday is next Tuesday, the momentum of the candidates is vitally important.

First let&#8217;s look at Newt Gingrich and Ron Paul. In Arizona, Paul got 4th, and Gingrich 3rd, while in Michigan, Paul got 3rd and Gingrich got 4th. However neither got any delegates. The most important aspect of their campaigns is now how they affect Santorum and Romney. Many are considering Santorum to only be a flavor of the month at the right time, however look at Gingrich and you can tell that it will not get you far. Gingrich has had his time in the spotlight and is now mostly just detracting votes from Santorum. In reality, if Gingrich were out of the race, most of his supporters would likely support Santorum. This support could have set Santorum over the edge in Michigan. On the other hand, Paul has not yet had his time in the limelight. After Iowa, it seemed as if Paul was next up, yet his rise has not been seen yet. Most of this can be attributed to the fact that Paul does not hold views like the rest of the flavors of the month. While he has many conservative views, he also has many liberal views and these alienate many voters. His following is strong and die-hard, but not quite enough to make him that popular. His supporters can be expected to mostly go to Santorum should Paul drop out. But this seems unlikely, at least not until after Super Tuesday, judging by the fact that he has had a history of staying in the race until the bitter end, like in 2008.

Now that Gingrich and Paul are essentially ruled out, we get back to Santorum. The major issue surrounding him is his viability as a general election candidate. While Santorum did effectively court many Democratic voters in Michigan, most of them can be attributed to Operation Hilarity, the nickname for Democrats trying to get him the nomination just to improve Obama&#8217;s chances. This fact alone is a testament to Santorum&#8217;s viability. Furthermore, statements like those bashing public education and homosexuality simply turns away too many voters, Democrat and Republican. Many moderate Republicans may abstain from voting all together in the general election should Santorum get the nomination. They do not want to choose between an Obama or Santorum White House. Additionally, many are pegging Santorum as simply a flavor of the month. However the problem with this claim is that the flavor of the month is someone who is conservative and acts as an anti-Romney, only to be replaced by another conservative anti-Romney. But in this case, there are no other candidates left, save for Paul, who as discussed earlier does not have enough of a chance. So while he may not be a flavor of the month, he lacks the ability to truly contest Obama.

Finally, we have the &#8220;winner&#8221; of the night, Mitt Romney. The reason for the quotation marks is because while Romney handily won in Arizona, he narrowly slipped by in Michigan. Michigan, Romney&#8217;s birth state, should have been easily won. The fact that it was even this contested is a testimony to the weakening of Romney&#8217;s campaign. As this campaign wears on, Romney has gone from being the only Republican not made fun of (aside from his hair), to yet another Republican to make fun of. With his statements flaunting his wealth, Romney is unreachable by the average voter. However, despite this fact, Romney has enough intelligence and experience to be a good president. He also has the best chances against Obama. While moderate Republicans may abstain from the election under a Santorum nomination, conservatives would not risk an Obama second term under a Romney ticket.

Going forward, Romney still seems to be the most logical choice, however he is no longer the inevitable one. Romney must ensure to keep his strong campaign going, and ensure to connect to the electorate better. Moreover, the impact of this drawn out race may be seen in the general election in a number of ways. One of the primary impacts will be the ability of a candidate to establish a platform to go against Obama with quickly. Another large issue will be that of money. Republican donors have been split, while Obama has been raising millions of dollars. This late in the race, without being behind a single candidate, Republicans will find it difficult to  match Obama&#8217;s funding.

So as we head into Super Tuesday, Republicans can hope to get this race decided as soon as possible in order to rally behind a single candidate and bolster their chances of a Republican White House. But whether it will be Romney or Santorum has yet to be decided. Romney has the slight momentum, but Santorum is jumping at his heels, and this race will continue to be close.