---
id: 2024
title: 'Summit Week: G-8 and NATO'
date: 2012-05-20T05:00:01+00:00
author: Tyler Miksanek
layout: post
guid: http://rantaweek.com/?p=2024
permalink: /?p=2024
categories:
  - Economy
  - International
tags:
  - Afghanistan
  - debt crisis
  - france
  - Germany
  - hollande
  - Obama
---
Meeting at Camp David last week, the G-8 leaders primarily discussed the best way to combat the [European Debt Crisis](http://rantaweek.com/eurozone-debt-crisis-2012/ "Eurozone Debt Crisis – April 18, 2012").  But unlike the staid restatements that often result from these meetings, this summit produced an important change in policy.  Driven by a voter backlash against austerity that has manifested itself in both [Greece](http://rantaweek.com/greece-election-may-2012/ "Greece: When Elections Fail – May 15, 2012") and [France](http://rantaweek.com/hollandes-unachievable-social-justice-for-france-may-7-2012/ "Hollande’s Unachievable Social Justice For France- May 7, 2012"), the G-8 signaled a shift away from austerity and towards growth.  Perhaps most important in this shift is France&#8217;s new president Francois Hollande, who has argued against German Chancellor Angela Merkel&#8217;s austerity-driven rescue plan.  The result is that the G-8 made a commitment to promote European growth, establishing an alternative plan to combating financial woes.  While this does not signal an end to austerity, it does demonstrate that Europe will attempt to widen the range of its strategies in dealing with the debt crisis.  The G-8 is expanding their tactics, implying that the summit achieved some success.

However, the G-8 meeting is not the only summit in the news, as this week also marks the 2012 NATO summit in Chicago.  The location is important because Chicago has a reputation for attracting protesters earned after extensive riots during its hosting of the 1968 Democratic National Convention.  The G-8 summit was actually planned to take place in Chicago as well, but organizers feared that two nearly simultaneous summits would intensify the protesting, so the G-8 moved to Camp David while NATO stayed put.

Unsatisfied, protesters were quick to rally against the NATO visit.  Even with an increased police presence and several arrests, the protests were able to grow in size.  Remnants of Occupy groups from around the country joined forces with local protesters to make their voices heard.  The Occupy involvement is interesting, as Occupy has generally been focused on economic issues.  Since NATO is a military organization, the inclusion of Occupy protesters suggests the weakening movement is diversifying its base.  However, this diversification implies that Occupy&#8217;s original message has fizzled out and the remnants of the movement have been forced to find other issues.

One of the main protest issues is ending the war in Afghanistan.  While the current timetable for the [end of NATO military operations](http://rantaweek.com/afghan-pullout-april-15-2012/ "Leaving Afghanistan – April 15, 2012") in Afghanistan has a pullout scheduled for the end of 2014, many protesters feel this is too long to wait.  Ironically, these protesters may have a friend in France&#8217;s Francois Hollande.

Hollande has promised to withdraw all French combat troops from Afghanistan by the end of 2012, two years earlier than the previously established timetable dictates.  While this endangers the current plan to gradually hand control over to the Afghan forces, it does represent a decidedly anti-war sentiment in France that may spread to other nations.  U.S. President Obama, who has been a proponent of the 2014 pullout date, may need to monitor voter feelings towards the war to better align himself on the issue during this election year.

Both the G-8 and NATO summits signal policy shifts primarily influenced by the new voice of Francois Hollande on the international stage.  The true success of these summits, however, will ultimately be determined by the ability of world leaders to cooperate under the guidelines they have worked together to create.  International problems require an international solution, so let&#8217;s wish them good luck!