---
id: 5156
title: 'Exceptionally Ridiculous &#8211; Part 2'
date: 2013-03-19T21:42:51+00:00
author: Tyler Miksanek
layout: post
guid: http://rantaweek.com/?p=5156
permalink: /?p=5156
pdrp_attributionLocation:
  - caption
categories:
  - International
---
_In a multi-part article, RantAWeek editor Tyler Miksanek explains why the doctrine of American exceptionalism ultimately hurts American foreign policy.  This is the 2nd installment &#8211; for Part 1 &#8211; [click here](http://rantaweek.com/exceptionally-ridiculous-part-1/ "Exceptionally Ridiculous – Part 1").  To find Part 3 &#8211; [click here](http://rantaweek.com/exceptionally-ridiculous-part-3-of-3/ "Exceptionally Ridiculous – Part 3 of 3")._

In part 1, we left off with the idea that by following the doctrine of American exceptionalism in regard to our drone program, the United States ignores the potential for valuable relationships and makes enemies instead of friends.  But that&#8217;s not the only trouble American exceptionalism has gotten us into.

The unclear legality of drone strikes also makes America seem like an aggressor, placing U.S. foreign policy in an increasingly negative light.  International uproar over the use of drones, often leads to criticism that America attacks foreign nations indiscriminately.  Unfortunately, with improperly used force, the United States is making this criticism easy.  The _Economist_ explains that &#8220;the vast majority [of drone victims] appear to have been militants, but some have been unlucky civilians&#8221; (&#8220;Unmanned&#8221;).  Because the drone program has occasionally killed civilians, America has aroused acrimony and discontent across the Middle East.  However, the acceptance of American exceptionalism means that U.S. leaders ignore this international outrage in favor of continuing American policies.  After all, widespread controversy has not stopped the Obama administration from expanding the drone program into other countries.  Even while receiving international backlash for using drones in Pakistan, Obama has allowed an exponential increase of drone strikes in Yemen.  Instead of cooperation, the doctrine of exceptionalism has led to America ignoring other nations.  This unilateral approach complicates foreign policy as former allies become estranged.  The more that other nations dislike the U.S., the more difficult it will become to manage diplomacy abroad.

The hostility the U.S. has created in Pakistan through its use of drones is dangerous because it mirrors the hostility created during America&#8217;s 1980s involvement in Afghanistan.  That intervention in Afghanistan paved the way for the Taliban to seize control of the nation and then encourage terrorism against the United States.  But considering that an American intervention led to the Taliban&#8217;s rise, it is a little ironic that America&#8217;s plan to oust the Taliban was another intervention.  However, twelve years into the Afghan war, this plan to oust the Taliban has not been successful.  According to the London _Guardian_, the Taliban is still strong enough to carry out brazen attacks against Afghanistan&#8217;s Ministry of Defense &#8211; the very building that should be protecting Afghanistan from these sort of attacks (Graham).  Even when the U.S. is working under clear terms of international law, unlike the case with Pakistan, its attempts to intervene still appear to be failing.  The root of the problem lies once again with American exceptionalism, as these exceptionalist beliefs spur trust that the American military can defeat all of America&#8217;s foes.  This logic dictates that the U.S. military is powerful enough to win conflicts against militant networks like the Taliban, but the results of the twelve year Afghan War say otherwise.  Original optimism in the military&#8217;s ability dragged America into what soon became a mess in Afghanistan.  Against exceptionalist ideology, twelve years of commitment from the world&#8217;s most powerful military has done little to ensure stability.

America&#8217;s overconfidence did not stop with the decision to invade Afghanistan, as American troops were also overly optimistic in their ability to train Afghan security forces to better defend themselves against the Taliban.  Unfortunately, for all the American optimism involved, the program has by and large been a failure.  In regard to the supposedly trained Afghan troops, the New York Times explains &#8220;the crucial back end of the army — the logistics and supply teams that get bullets, fuel, food and water to where they need to be — is woefully unready, American and even some Afghan officers say&#8221; (Rosenberg).  One of the tenets of American exceptionalism is that countries in need should be taught to copy the American model of repairing their problems.  Following this viewpoint, the training program was designed to make the Afghan army more like America&#8217;s army.  However, as the current situation in Afghanistan clearly shows, the American model does not always work.  Afghanistan is in a time of need, but all the American assistance and training they have received has not led to a successful combat record against the Taliban.  American exceptionalism led to optimism that Afghan forces trained in American fighting techniques could keep the Taliban at bay, but years of unsuccessful efforts have proved this optimism wrong.

Graham-Harrison, Emma. &#8220;Taliban Suicide Bomber Attacks Afghan Ministry of Defence.&#8221; _The Guardian_. Guardian News and Media, 09 Mar. 2013. Web. 14 Mar. 2013.

Rosenberg, Matthew. &#8220;U.S. Military Faces Fire as It Pulls Out of Afghanistan.&#8221; _New York Times_ 16 Feb. 2013: A1. _The New York Times_. The New York Times, 15 Feb. 2013. Web. 15 Mar. 2013.

&#8220;Unmanned Aerial Vehicles &#8211; Death From Afar.&#8221; _The Economist_. The Economist Newspaper Limited, 3 Nov. 2012. Web. 24 Feb. 2013.