---
id: 5163
title: 'Exceptionally Ridiculous &#8211; Part 3 of 3'
date: 2013-03-20T21:54:43+00:00
author: Tyler Miksanek
layout: post
guid: http://rantaweek.com/?p=5163
permalink: /?p=5163
pdrp_attributionLocation:
  - caption
categories:
  - International
---
_In a multi-part article, RantAWeek editor Tyler Miksanek explains why the doctrine of American exceptionalism ultimately hurts American foreign policy.  This is the 3nd installment- so first read [Part 1](http://rantaweek.com/exceptionally-ridiculous-part-1/ "Exceptionally Ridiculous – Part 1") and [Part 2](http://rantaweek.com/exceptionally-ridiculous-part-2/ "Exceptionally Ridiculous – Part 2")._

Even though the tenets of American exceptionalism have largely failed the U.S. in both Afghanistan and Pakistan, it is still possible to view exceptionalism as the best path to pursue in foreign policy.  Following this train of logic, many analysts argue that American exceptionalism is a necessary part of world affairs.  Former _New York Times_ correspondent Clifford May sums up this viewpoint by arguing, &#8220;At present, there is no substitute for American leadership.  America is the indispensible nation.  That is what makes it exceptional&#8221; (May).  May&#8217;s belief views America&#8217;s large defense budget and frequent interventions not as consequences of nationalistic narcissism but instead as needed forces for global peace.  No other nation, after all, has the money or the resources to easily finance America&#8217;s 700 billion dollar defense budget.  According to this argument, even the influence of emerging powers should be discounted.  While a nation like China may soon be able to obtain the needed resources and finance a similarly large budget, America doesn&#8217;t want a nation with undemocratic values having an increased say in world affairs.

However nice the &#8216;indispensible&#8217; excuse sounds, it still fails to address key problems with American exceptionalism.  While Americans like to believe their country is needed to help run world affairs, there is already an organization that is supposed to do just that &#8211; the United Nations.  But instead of cooperating with other nations at this readily available world forum, the United States often chooses to ignore global initiatives in favor of its own policies.  The _Boston Review_ explains &#8220;There is a long list of such self-exemptions [including] the refusal to sign the Kyoto Treaty regulating the pollution of the environment [and] the refusal to strengthen the convention on biological weapons&#8221; (Zinn).  Even though the United States has the ability to partially relinquish its role as the world&#8217;s policeman, American leaders often steer the country away from international cooperation.  And while the U.S. cites certain abuses of human rights when explaining why it refuses to closely cooperate with emerging countries like China, the _Boston Review_ also points out that America has a history of being hypocritical about its own human rights abuses. &#8220;The United States sends suspects—people who have not been tried or found guilty of anything—to prisons in Morocco, Egypt, Libya, and Uzbekistan, countries that the State Department itself says use torture&#8221; (Zinn).  The United States argues from an assumed moral high ground, but in reality has a questionable recent history of human rights as well.  So while many Americans believe that an exceptional United States is the best force for good on the world stage, the truth is a bit more muddled.  Instead of America being the only indispensible superpower, the U.S. is instead unfairly hesitant to share power with other nations.

United States policymakers have adopted the belief of American exceptionalism to support the United States unilaterally dictating international affairs, but this belief ultimately prevents collaboration and hurts the nation&#8217;s foreign policy.  By ignoring the opinions of other nations, the U.S. has strained relationships, and by being overconfident in its military, America has worked itself into prickly situations such as Afghanistan.  While some people are quick to call this exceptionalist thinking necessary for foreign affairs, that thought process is just another manifestation of America&#8217;s inflated ego.  Economist Jeff Faux explains in _The Servant Economy_ that &#8220;only in the United States did a majority agree with the statement &#8216;Our people are not perfect, but our culture is superior to others&#8217;.  Even the notoriously proud French were only half as convinced of their exceptional culture as Americans were&#8221; (16).  This &#8216;holier than thou&#8217; attitude might be comforting, but it actually hurts America&#8217;s position in the world.  By refusing to work with other nations, the United States burns bridges that might be needed in the future.  Cooperation, not exceptionalism, is the key to a more successful foreign policy as well as increased global stability.

Faux, Jeff. _The Servant Economy: Where America&#8217;s Elite Is Sending the Middle Class._ Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2012. Print.

May, Clifford D. &#8220;In Defense of American Exceptionalism.&#8221; _National Review_. National Review Online, 2 June 2011. Web. 3 Mar. 2013.

Zinn, Howard. &#8220;The Power and the Glory.&#8221; _Boston Review_. Boston Review, Summer 2005. Web. 15 Mar. 2013.